{[}\href{terrier_http.html}{Previous: Web-based Terrier}{]}
{[}\href{index.html}{Contents}{]} {[}\href{trec_examples.html}{Next:
TREC Experiment Examples}{]}\\

\section{Real-time Indexing and Search of
Websites}\label{real-time-indexing-and-search-of-websites}

In Terrier 4.0, a new website search application was added to facilitate
easy indexing and search of websites. This application combines the
crawling functionality of
\href{http://code.google.com/p/crawler4j/}{Crawler4J}, the Terrier's
\href{realtime_indices.html}{updatable Memory index structures} and a
\href{terrier_http.html}{Web-based Terrier front-end} to demonstrate
real-time indexing and retrieval of content from the Web. In particular,
this application allows websites to be added dynamically to a frontier
of pages to be crawled. Pages from the added websites will be downloaded
in the background and indexed automatically. The browser-based search
interface provides a basic search facility over the index produced.

\subsection{Launching the Website Search
Application}\label{launching-the-website-search-application}

The website search application is comprised of two main components.
First, the
\href{javadoc/org/terrier/services/websitesearch/package-summary.html}{org.terrier.services.websitesearch}
package contains a service class named
\href{javadoc/org/terrier/services/websitesearch/WebsiteSearch.html}{WebsiteSearch}
that provides methods to crawl new websites, index documents from those
websites, search over the index produced and write the index to disk.
Second, a JSP (java servlet page) search interface is stored in
\emph{src/webapps/websitesearch/} that provides search controls and
rendering capability for the search results. The website search
application is launched via the JSP search interface, which calls the
java WebsiteSearch service internally top access all needed
functionality.

Since the interface is represented as a java servlet page, it can be
loaded into a Jetty webserver using
\href{terrier_http.html}{http\_terrier.sh} by specifying the website
search interface as follows:

\begin{verbatim}
bin/http_terrier.sh 8080 src/webapps/websitesearch/
\end{verbatim}

This will host the website search demo at:

\begin{verbatim}
http://localhost:8080/
\end{verbatim}

It is worth noting that the website search application configures itself
automatically, regardless of the contents of the
\texttt{etc/terrier.properties} file. It does this by overriding
relevant variables in the
\href{javadoc/org/terrier/services/websitesearch/WebsiteSearch.html}{WebsiteSearch}
and
\href{javadoc/org/terrier/services/websitesearch/crawler4j/CrawlStrategy.html}{CrawlStrategy}
classes with reasonable defaults for Web search.

\subsection{Using the Application}\label{using-the-application}

When first loaded, the splash screen will ask for you to enter a website
to index, as shown below:

\includegraphics[width=1.00000\textwidth,height=1.00000\textwidth]{images/WebsiteSearch1.png}

When the `Crawl Website' button is clicked, the given hostname will be
added to a crawl frontier (list of pages to crawl). A Web crawler will
first download the page for that URL, and if it exists adds it to a
\href{javadoc/org/terrier/realtime/memory/MemoryIndex.html}{MemoryIndex}.
Then any links on the page are added to the crawl frontier. The `crawl
depth' parameter specifies how many successive pages to follow the links
from to find new documents. The crawler will restrict itself to crawling
only pages from the originally named host, i.e. URL's that contain the
hostname you originally entered.

Once crawling is underway, the main search interface will be loaded:

\includegraphics[width=1.00000\textwidth,height=1.00000\textwidth]{images/WebsiteSearch2.png}

The top search bar facilitates retrieval over all documents crawled so
far. The left sidebar provides statistics for the current index, allows
new hosts to be added to the crawl frontier and for the current index to
be saved as a classical Terrier on-disk index.

{[}\href{terrier_http.html}{Previous: Web-based Terrier}{]}
{[}\href{index.html}{Contents}{]} {[}\href{trec_examples.html}{Next:
TREC Experiment Examples}{]}

\begin{center}\rule{0.5\linewidth}{\linethickness}\end{center}

Webpage: \url{http://terrier.org}\\
Contact:
\href{mailto:terrier@dcs.gla.ac.uk}{\nolinkurl{terrier@dcs.gla.ac.uk}}\\
\href{http://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/}{School of Computing Science}\\
Copyright (C) 2004-2015 \href{http://www.gla.ac.uk/}{University of
Glasgow}. All Rights Reserved.

~
